[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy Aloway. Tracy, covering
the AI boom is actually reminding me a
little bit of the tariff boom in April
simply because every day there are new
headlines. Like there just today, we're
recording this November 12th, Anthropic
commits $50 billion to build AI data
centers in the US. So the advanced model
companies are vertically integrating
more to build their own data centers.
Every day some new development.
>> Yeah, it's becoming pretty hard to keep
up. So I think we're probably just going
to talk in terms of billions and
trillions. We're just going to say lots
and lots of money is going into the
space. But the way I've been thinking
about it is okay, at this point everyone
agrees that the AI buildout is super
expensive and all these companies are
spending massive amounts of capex to do
this. And I'm starting to think that AI
capex is kind of like the Schroinger's
cat of markets in the sense that it
could either be a massive strength for
these companies because the capex is so
expensive and it takes so much money to
build out and so anyone who manages to
do it kind of builds a moat around their
business
>> or it could be a massive weakness,
right? if you're spending all this money
and then that doesn't end up generating
the revenues that you actually need to
justify it. And going back to the
Schroinger's analogy, it seems like we
just don't know what's going to come out
of the box, right? Like it's
simultaneously a strength and a weakness
and until we build out AGI or whatever,
like we're just not going to know.
>> Totally right. There's so much at stake
here and obviously we know the numbers
are absolutely enormous. They're
staggering and we could talk about them
too. The financing structures are also
very interesting. You know, it's one
thing if you just have Meta or Alphabet
and they make a ton of money already and
they're spending money on data centers,
whatever. That's one thing. It's another
thing when you start seeing these SPVS
where the hyperscaler puts in this
amount of money and then the private
credit puts in this equity and then they
borrow a bunch and then there's all
these questions about the payback. And
we think of tech as from years and years
as basically being this equity story.
And when it becomes a credit story.
Yeah. And when you know people are
talking about quoting Oracle CDS. I
always forget these companies even have
CDS because I'm so unus to thinking of
big tech companies as credits. So when I
see people starting to tweet Oracle CDS
charts or coreweave CDS charts, it's
like okay, we are in a different level
of capital intensity,
>> right? And some of those swaps have been
going up lately. I'm going to say one
more thing. Thinking back to the 2008
financial crisis, I remember the
economist at Raymond James, I think it
was Jeff Sout who went on to um become a
very big name. Yeah, we should we should
have him on the podcast. But he made the
point that historically when you had
real estate crashes, property crashes,
it was usually because of a problem in
the economy. But then what happened in
the run-up to 2007208 is the housing
market crash became the approximate
cause of the troubles in the economy.
And if you think about how much money is
being spent on AI right now, again,
billions, trillions, possibly of
dollars, it's very easy to see how AI
could morph into a problem for the wider
economy.
>> For the real economy, totally. Just on
this note and then we'll get into our
conversation. The center for public
enterprises out with a great report
today called bubble or nothing by Edv
Arun pointing out one of the things that
makes data centers interesting is how
they sit at this intersection of
essentially industrial spending and real
estate. It's an interesting asset class
for its own right. So much to talk
about. We could never do it justice in
one episode, but that means we got to do
more. Anyway, I'm very excited for
today's episode. We really do have the
perfect guest. Someone who's been
writing about this for a long time.
Someone who's just been writing about
the internet and all things for longer
than any of us. Someone who's been
blogging and investing for far longer
than um either of us or anything like
that. Way more knowledgeable about how
these businesses work than most. Very
focused on the data center buildout.
We're going to be speaking with Paul
Kadroski. He is a fellow at the MIT
Institute for the Digital Economy. also
a partner at SK Ventures and longtime
internet blogger, writer, newsletter,
yapper, etc. Someone we've never never
had on the podcast before. So Paul,
thank you so much for uh joining us.
>> Hey guys, thanks. Good to be here other
than the blogging part, but
>> no, it's all it's all it was you're
you're a true pioneer in that and it's
impressive that you still write with the
output that you do. At some point in the
last year, I feel like you really got
laser focused or maybe in the last two
years really got laser focused on the
data center story is this is where the
action is.
>> Yeah, I did. And in part just because I
caught myself by surprise with it. It
was weird. I was looking at first half
GDP data actually first quarter GDP data
earlier in the year and you know this
has become now a common place that
people know this but I hadn't realized
what a large fraction of GDP growth in
the first quarter data centers were. it
was on the order of 50%, much larger if
you included all sort of externalities
all the other things that data center
spending in turn kind of accelerates and
then obviously the same thing was true
in the second quarter and it was I got
back to thinking about my dog and I was
my analogy is that
>> as one does
>> as one does I got thinking like my dog
barks when the mailman comes to the
house and keeps barking and then the
mailman goes away and I'm convinced he
thinks he makes the mailman go away
[laughter] right he has this really
screwed up causality and it's like dude
If you don't bark, it goes away anyway.
This is part of the job. They just go
away. And I think about macro policy in
the same way that if you don't
understand the drivers of GDP growth,
you're likely to think that whatever it
is you would most like to be causing GDP
growth is doing that. So in the case of
the US in the first half of the year,
you know, it was this puzzle was well
maybe it's tariffs. Maybe tariffs are
actually contributing to it. Maybe
consumers are much more resilient than
we expected. And as it turns out, a huge
factor, probably the largest factor was
this sort of unintentional private
sector stimulus program, otherwise known
as data centers.
>> And for me, that all started so that
started this puzzle of understanding
this sort of discommensurate size, the
consequences of that size and the the
acceleration's consequences in terms of
where where the money's coming from and
all sorts of other things. But just to
reframe in terms of something you guys
were already talking about and this I
think is super important in
understanding why this particular
episode is likely to turn out to be
historically really important.
>> Wait, when you say episode you're
referring to this podcast episode,
you're not referring to the broader
episode of AI data center.
>> No, entirely just the podcast.
[laughter]
>> Who cares about data centers when it's
the 10 year anniversary of OddLoga? So
the reason why it's it's sort of it's
going to be historically important is
because for the first time we combine
all the major ingredients of every
historical bubbles in a single bubble.
We have a meta bubble, no pun intended,
for meta. We have real estate. You guys
just talked about this, right? Some of
the largest bubbles in US history had
some relationship to real estate. We
have a great technology story. Almost
all the large modern bubbles have
something to do with technology. We have
loose credit. Most of the major bubbles
in some sense have a loose credit
aspect. And one of the other
exacerbating pieces that's some of the
largest bubbles thinking about even the
financial crisis is some kind of
notional government backs stop. You
know, think about the role in terms of
broadening home ownership in the context
of the real estate bubble and the role
that Fanny and Freddy played and
loosening credit standards and all of
those things. This is the first bubble
that has all of that. It's like we said,
you know what would be great? Let's
create a bubble that takes everything
that ever worked and put it all in one.
And this is what we've done. So it's got
a speculative real estate component.
It's probably one of the strongest
technology stories we ever had. Back to
rural electrification in terms of a
technology story. We have loose credit.
You guys talked about what's happening
with respect to
>> not just the role of private credit, but
how private credit has largely
supplanted commercial banks with respect
to being lenders here. So we have all of
these pieces that have all come together
at once. And I think in terms of framing
what's going on right now, it's really
important to understand that it brings
together all of these components in ways
we've never seen before, which is one of
the reasons why the notion that we can
land this thing on the runway gently is
nonsense.
>> I love that framing. The meta bubble is
perfect. Also, I had an epiphany
earlier. I already told Joe, so you can
attest to this, but I realized private
credit kind of supplanted shadow banking
as the term, right? Like after 2008 we
called it shadow banking and then at
some point it flipped to I guess the
couplier private credit.
>> Shadow banking always sounded sinister
in a way the private credit
>> someone figured that out and they're
like well now it's private credit.
>> I like to think of it as a kind of
financial witness protection program
[laughter] but it was like oh you're
those guys I understand now who you are.
Yeah, it's kind of like that and it's
now like 1 point whatever it is $1.7
trillion dollars is the size of which is
larger than you know many components of
the orthodox lending market combined in
terms of the the private credit industry
itself. So that's a huge new piece of
this that sometimes escapes notice how
big it is and why it emerged. So all of
those pieces.
>> Yeah, it's stunning the growth that
we've seen. Let me ask a very basic
question before we go further. But one
thing I've been wondering is Joe
mentioned that anthropic headline that
we heard before. We've seen Meta raising
financing for data center builds, all
that stuff. Why do these massively
profitable and cashri companies have to
raise financing at all?
>> Well, they don't, but there's these
irritating shareholders out there who
[laughter] get all pissy whenever you
start diluting earnings per share too
much and diverting it towards a single
source. Now, that's not the case with
private companies, obviously, but by the
same token, Open AAI doesn't have the
luxury of having cash flows via which
they can do any of the things we're
describing. So anthropic uh open AAI and
everyone else they have no option other
than to do exactly what we're
describing. It's a different story with
respect to how what percentage of
Google's free cash flow or Amazon free
cash flow that they want to continue to
divert towards data centers. So in terms
of the privates this is the only option
that they have. The public's obviously
increasing the hyperscalers increasingly
it was we got up to the point where
around $500 billion around 50% of their
free cash flow was going directly
towards spending on data centers. And
that's obviously a point at which you
know we have other things we have to do
with free cash flow and including having
some of it be earnings per share. And so
increasingly it's become the option. You
see what Met is doing recently with
respect to its SPVS. We bring in other
participants create new financing
vehicles and then we play this
entertaining game of it's not really our
debt. It's in an SPV. I don't have to
roll it back onto my own balance sheet
and then bring in new lenders, new
private credit firms and others. And so
that's the reason obviously it's partly
because of the scale. It's partly
because the privates who have no other
option and it's partly we've kind of
tapped out the public companies in terms
of the fraction of free cash flow that
they feel as if they can spend with
impunity in on these projects. explain
to us for those who don't know, you
know, again, SPV one of these terms that
we really haven't heard in a while and
there's nothing inherently bad about an
SPV except that you only hear about them
typically after there's something, you
know, some sort of crazy, right? Which
is weird obviously, but yes,
>> tell how would you in the broad strokes,
how would you characterize what these
financing vehicles are? So mechanically,
it's just a way of making sure that I
don't have to roll debt onto my balance
sheet. But legally, it's a structure
into which I and my partners contribute
capital that in exchange for which they
retain legal title to the project that
we've created, which allows us to all
contribute capital to this, but not have
to put it back on my balance sheet and
therefore not to have that debt rated,
which is really the key. Now, if you
look at the actual intrinsic, say for
example, the recent meta project that
they did in conjunction with Blue Owl,
it's wild in Byzantine. It looks like
something you might have seen in what
was that in Harry Potter, the forest
with all the spiderw webs. It looks a
little like that, right? Where
everything's connected to everything and
all I know is there's something in here
is going to get me. So there's
incredible complexity, but at the core
it's a mechanism via which I can raise
more capital and keep it off my balance
sheet by creating a legal entity that
controls the actual data center and I
don't therefore have to put it back roll
it all back onto my balance sheet and
have it rated. Now there's weird
intricacies obviously. So for example,
what happens if at some period in the
future this thing isn't performing the
way we expect? Who owns it at that
point? Is there a payment exchange? Does
it become Metas? Does it become Blue
Owls? Does it become someone else? And
these things will turn out to matter.
Right now, no one cares. If you go
through some of the documents on these
things, it's not entirely clear what the
recourse payment will be when it ever if
and when it ever has to revert back to
another owner. And it's not going to be
held on to by the SPV. And I think this
will turn out to be really important
four or five years down the road. But
right now, nobody cares.
[music]
So number one, the lifespan of data
centers is actually not that long. I
can't remember the like exact estimate
but maybe like three or four years
something like that and then also you
have this risk that tenants are sort of
rolling through and no one knows what
that actually means for the structure of
the debt and you kind of get this asset
liability mismatch.
>> Yeah. So I'll start with the first one
first. So, this gets into something
Michael Bur was tweeting about the other
day, which was sort of entertaining that
back about four years ago, tech
companies changed the depreciation
schedule for the assets inside of data
centers. They extended them somewhat.
Now, that wasn't an error. The reality
is that data centers used for the
purposes like at AWS where you've got a
big S3 bucket and I'm storing data
inside of it. Those things generally
speaking, the assets are longived. I'm
not running them flat out. It's not
these are not street car racers that I'm
running around inside of a data center.
These are are relatively inexpensive
chips that I'm using for really mundane
purposes like storing large amounts,
terabytes, exabytes of data inside of S3
buckets. So, it's not unreasonable to
say their lifespans fairly long. They're
not being taxed that heavily. So,
pushing out the the depreciation
schedule makes a lot of sense. But that
was coincident with the emergence of
GPUdriven data centers using products
like chips from Nvidia
>> and those have much shorter lifespans.
So depending on the usage. So there's
two different reasons why the lifespan
and therefore the depreciation schedule
of a GPU inside of a data center is very
different. So the reason most people
think about is oh well technology
changes really quickly and I want to
have the latest and greatest and
therefore I'm going to have to upgrade
all the time. That's important but it's
probably about equal if not maybe
slightly less important than the nature
of how the chip is used inside the data
center. So when you run using like the
latest say an Nvidia chip for training a
model, those things are being run flat
out 24 hours a day, seven days a week,
which is why they're liquid cooled.
They're inside of these giant centers
where one of your primary problems is
keeping them all cool. It's like saying,
"I bought a used car and I don't care
what it was used for." Well, if it turns
out it was used by someone who was doing
like Lulu man's 24 hours of endurance
with it, that's very different even if
the mileage is the same as someone who
only drove it to church on Sundays,
right? These are very different
consequences with respect to what's
called the thermal degradation of the
chip. The chip's been run hot and flat
out. So it probably it's it useful
lifespan might be on the order of two
years, maybe even 18 months. So there's
a huge difference in terms of how the
chip was used leaving aside whether or
not there's a new generation of what's
come along. So it takes us back to these
depreciation schedules. So these
depreciation schedules change just as
the nature of how the lifespan of the
chips change dramatically because I can
use something for you know storing
things in S3 buckets for a long time six
to eight years isn't unreasonable but if
I'm doing the the the lemons endurance
equivalent with a GPU it might be 18
months that's a huge difference in terms
of the likely lifespan of a product that
I'm depreciating over a very different
period and so that's a huge part of the
problem here with respect to you know
understanding
the intrinsics in terms of how data
centers can and can't make money, how
they how you have to think about the
likely capex requirements because of
this much shorter lifespan of the
underlying technology.
>> And then talk about the tenency rollover
risk I guess we might call it.
>> Yeah, it's really interesting. So one
way to to think about data centers is as
giant apartment buildings, right?
They're essentially gigantic commercial
pieces of commercial real estate with a
bunch of tenants. Sometimes there's a
lot of tenants, sometimes there's only
one. Sometimes Google bought the whole
apartment building and just moved in or
this a giant office building they just
moved in. It's all theirs, right? So
think about it in those sorts of terms.
And the reason why as a sponsor of a
data center I might take a different
view on how many tenants I want is again
you think about it in terms of what can
I get Google to pay what can I get
someone who's a much flightier tenant to
pay. Well, I can get the flightier
tenants, more of them and diversified as
all leasing inside the data center
paying higher lease rates for GPUs over
the period of tenency than I can get a
Google to pay. Why? Because Google's got
great credit. They don't have to pay
very much and they know they don't. So,
if you look at the commercial real
estate data, the cap rate, the blended
cap rate for these for the largest data
centers that are tended by hyperscalers
is horrible. It's like 4.8 5.3%. It's
like a why don't you just buy a
treasury? What the hell are you doing?
So what happens then is people start
blending in more different kinds of
tenants to Tracy's point as an effort to
try and improve the yield the cap rate
on the underlying instrument which is
the data center. So what you could all
of this should start to sound familiar
because it's this idea of if I blend
together all of these different
tendencies I can increase the yield of
the securitized instrument but that also
changes the risk profile of what comes
out the other end which is takes us to
things like the increasing um usage of
these things in asset back securities
which are these tanch securities that
have all the different pieces. We have
different layers associated with it and
that's a reflection of well there's
different tenants inside these data
centers and people want different
exposures to risks so I may only want to
buy the senior trunch you may want to
buy the mezzanine and Tracy may want to
buy the equity tranch
>> can I just say I know we already said
this but Paul is truly truly the perfect
guest
>> I remember reading his coverage of
subprime and securization in like 2008
and so having someone who's able to
synthesize
That experience with what's going on now
is just fantastic.
>> I kind of can't believe we're doing this
again. I mean, look, I mean, again,
there's nothing inherently wrong with
SPVS. There's nothing inherently wrong
with tunching, right? Like a lot of
these things are very intuitive, etc.
But
>> it is still a little weird how central
this is and how it's the same old
there's nothing new. I mean, some on
some financial level, it feels very
familiar.
>> No, there's there's nothing new under
the sun. And uh but I think that point's
really important. It's not that tanches
are evil. It's not that securitization
is evil or that asset back security or
project finance is evil. No. No. All of
these things are terrific pieces of uh
you know of the arsenal whenever you're
actually raising money for projects. The
issue start to arise at the scale which
is what you guys have already alluded
to. But the secondary piece which again
will sound painfully familiar to the
financial crisis is there's a flywheel
that gets created at the back end of
this. So once you start securitizing the
yield producing assets in the form of
these TR securities, the people who are
purchasing those things don't give a
rat's ass what's going on inside this
AI. I I joke all the time that a lot of
these people can't spell AI. They don't
care what's going on inside the data
center, right? It could be, you know,
the world hideand go seek championships
going on in there. I don't care as long
as it generates yield and I can
securitize it. Well, that's very much
analogous to what's happened in prior
periods like this where again you get
this secondary flywheel effect of let's
just create more of these things because
our customers want more and it's they're
really easy to securitize and look it's
backed up by Meta and Google or whoever
else.
>> Well, so this actually brings an
important point. I mentioned this great
report out from the center for public
enterprise. One of the things that they
pointed out is in this market
environment where everyone is just be
you know there's this sort of AI pixie
dust that if you but also just the
reality if your revenues are surging the
market probably loves you
>> like talk to us about the unit economics
here like is the incentive for all the
players essentially to just grow the top
line as much as possible even if these
aren't whether we're talking about
inference on a per token basis
even if these aren't particularly
profitable, how are you thinking about
the unit economics of some of these
businesses and how that could eventually
perhaps sort of um you know come home to
roost so to speak.
>> Yeah. So
the term of art obviously is these
things have negative unit economics
which is a fancy way of saying that we
lose money on every sale and try to make
it up on volume, right? I mean that's
the
>> that's the problem here. So but that's
okay. I mean we've had lots of things.
Amazon in its early days had negative
unit economics. We can you can get past
that. And as an aside, I'll say right
here, all of the things I'm saying isn't
to say that, you know, AI is some kind
of, you know, furry Tamagotchi thing
that's just a fad. AI is an incredibly
important technology. What we're talking
about is how it's funded and the
consequences of doing that in terms of
what's going to happen with respect to
the businesses and the return on those
businesses, right? So the unit economics
are dire for a bunch of reasons mostly
having to do with the more tokens you
have to produce the costs rise more or
less linearly with the demand on the
system as opposed to an orthodox
software business where the more people
who use my service the more people
across which I can spread my relatively
fixed costs.
>> Yeah,
>> that's not the way that for the most
part current generation large language
models work. costs rise linearly or
sublinearly with the number of users
which makes for really crappy unit
economics and that's a big part of the
problem. So, so from there you get to
the question of okay, so what does it
have to look like in terms of making it
look profitable? There's lots of ways to
back into this. You can do bottoms up
models that would suggest that like if
every iPhone user on Earth paid 50 bucks
that would work. We could have around a
$400 billion $500 billion annual stream
of revenue flowing and well that's not
going to happen but it's worth pointing
out like that would do it but it gives
you a sense of the kind of scale
>> of what at a consumer level for example
it might have to look like. People come
at it from the other end. One of my
favorite ways that people come at it is
to say, "Well, we could create a viable
model here." If you think, this was in
the JPM call last week. I don't know if
you guys saw the summary of it, but it
was huge fun for the whole family
listening in. [laughter] Um, so one of
the ways they backed into it was a top-
down model where they said, "Well, the
global TAM for human labor [laughter]
trillion dollars."
>> I love the global TAM. I said that was
right up there with saying like, if I
reduce humans to their chemical
components, here's what I can get for
you. Well, this was this was Steve
Eisman's line which was like beware of
anyone that mentions Tam.
>> Right. Right. Right. No. Exactly. And so
then and then they play the next step is
of course to say well imagine we can get
10% of that. Right. Which is which is
obviously one of the oldest cliches.
It's like saying you know I'm going to
get 5% of the Chinese market. No one
ever gets 5% of the Chinese market. It
doesn't happen. So the same thing won't
happen with global labor. But if you
were to do you do the math on that that
co those kinds of numbers get you to on
a weighted average cost of capital basis
to a reasonable return on current and
planned expenditures with respect to AI
data centers if you assume we're heading
to about a three or four trillion dollar
number which is kind of the I think it's
around the number that most people put
out there which I think is a completely
wrong number but nevertheless that's the
kind of number and what you'd have to do
to get there. You can get there from a
bottoms up model by making some really
unreasonable assumptions about the total
numbers of subscribers and what they
pay. You can get there from a top- down
model. You can also get there by
thinking about it purely in terms of
industrial users. Like think about
purely API users. Let's pretend retail
users of AI don't exist and say you know
anthropics projecting 70 billion dollars
in revenue in 2028. something like 35%
of their current revenues. Most of their
revenues today are from their API. 35%
of that is from software developers.
That's split between two large users,
co-pilot and cursor. And so, you know,
we can model that out. Everybody has to
become a software developer. And we can
make the math work. The problem is it's
got huge fragility, right, in customer
concentration risk. So a cursor
disappears as a user of Enthropics API
and you just blew out 15% of your of
your revenues because they're gone and
they've done something else. And as it
turns out, cursor two weeks ago
announced that they were creating their
own internal model that you could use
for software development. You wouldn't
have to call the entropic API. So you
can think about all these different ways
to get there, but they all have a lot of
built-in fragility with respect to
either we all become software developers
and we all subscribe to cursor.
Just going back to the used car analogy
that you mentioned before when we're
thinking about all this financing of the
AI capex spend is it useful to think of
GPUs essentially as the collateral
[sighs and gasps]
>> there the problem yes
>> or what would you call the collateral in
this case
>> so what ends up happening the collateral
in this case is the GPU there's no
question it is the GPU the issue is the
this disconnect this temporal mismatch
that you alluded to earlier with respect
to the duration of the underlying debt
and the assets that are producing the
income that allows me to pay for the
debt. Right? So, we've got this probably
unprecedented temporal mismatch with
30-year loans and two-year depreciation
on the underlying collateral, which is
essentially the GPUs that are the
incomeroucing assets. Um, and so that
creates this constant refinancing risk
because I'm going to continually have to
turn over the base. And we've seen this
many, many times. Right now, it's easy
to turn it over, but in two years it may
not be possible. There's a wave of
refinancings coming in 2028 in many of
the more speculative data centers. Will
they be able to turn over their debt and
refinance all the GPUs? Today they
could, but today isn't 2028. So that's
the inherent problem is this structural
temporal mismatch between the
incomeroucing assets and the duration of
the loans. And it gets worse if you
think about it in more holistic terms.
Think about it in terms of one of the
other gating factors here that's driving
all of this is the scarcity of energy
supply. It's really difficult.
>> You can hook them up to the Well, it's
actually kind of turned into a bit of a
joke. I can hook you up to the grid, but
I can't give you power. I don't know if
you saw the recent episode with the
Oregon Public Utilities Commission.
Amazon had three data centers that they
connected to the grid and it was kind of
like the Oregon PUC said, "Oh, you want
power, too? Oh, [laughter] wow. We can't
help you with we can't help you with
that." So, now there's a complaint in at
the Oregon PUC from ADS, Amazon, the
digital services group that runs AWS
complaining that we now have data
centers, but we have no power, right? It
sounds a little bit like like a winter
storm hazard or something but it's a
structural problem with respect to the
inability. We can connect people but we
can't provide them with power. So the
next stage is and this takes best back
to the collateral problem and the
temporal mismatch is that people are
doing behind the meter power. They're
building natural gas or if you're fairmy
you're saying wild things about nuclear
power and you're saying okay I'm coming
with my own power. You don't need to
connect me to the grid because I'm going
to power this myself. That creates, you
know, two or three different issues, but
among the more important is think about
how longived an asset, a natural gas
plant is. This is not something that's
got a fiveyear lifespan and we just
cheerily wave goodbye. This is going to
be running probably 25 to 30 years. And
the only thing you your ability to
forecast, we know the cost of the
natural gas plant, but in terms of the
cost of the center and its income
ability to generate enough income to pay
off the loan associated with the natural
gas plant, God help you if you think you
can sort that out because what you've
really got is a huge likelihood of a
stranded asset out there. Natural gas
plants that are no longer useful for
powering these things that they [music]
were built for.
>> [music]
[music]
>> The good news is that Daniel Jurgen said
this on the show. You know the back
orders for natural gas turbines like you
probably if you ordered one today you
would probably get it in 2030. So the
good news I suppose 10 years is that at
least you [laughter] don't have to have
the turbine sitting there for years like
I don't know it's may I don't know if
that's good news at all but there are
you may never get it anyway
>> you may never get the gas plant built
anyway someone will be stuck with the
bill
>> but it kind of raises this goes back to
Tracy's question earlier this raises a
really interesting thing so like like
honestly what the f are all these people
doing who are announcing
>> these giant funding trans I think of it
like people all showing up at the okay
coral at once and it's like dude over
there has one gun and I got two.
>> Yeah,
>> that guy's got Oh, two.
>> That's not a knife. This is a knife.
>> Oh, yeah. But but it's this deterrence.
It's this deterrence program that's
going on. Don't even imagine spending 50
because I'm spending a hundred.
>> There's no point in you doing any of
this.
>> It's this game theoretic.
>> Well, this also worries me because you
hear so many people framing this as like
an existential competition, right? And
once you start calling something
existential,
the limit on spend, well, it becomes
unlimited, right? It's about survival,
so you'll spend anything.
>> That's why the conversation has turned
in recent weeks to the one entity that
actually, at least in theory, can print
as much money as possible,
>> right? That's the, you know, the Sarah
Friars accidental footed mouth thing
earlier the week. But that's right. But
that's again goes back to my original
point about what makes this bubble
unusual. It's that the this element that
not only is there a kind of bag stop,
but there's actually a notion of
wrapping it in the flag. We have to win
this competition. We have to do what it
takes. This is existential. It's us
versus China. And it's not just the US
doing this. I was talking to some
Canadian policy makers just earlier this
morning. Exact same thing going on
there. We have to build out a domestic
indust. Same thing in the UK. Same thing
in Germany. And so there's this idea
around the world that sovereign AI is
something that's incredibly important.
So this this government backs stop isn't
just mythic. It's it's global. It's this
idea that we all have to win. we all
have to win which obviously can't happen
but that the government's playing a role
in it that be creates this kind of
limitless source of capital
>> you know so one of the things that's
going on and maybe it's part of the same
the sort of maximalist strategy
mentioned anthropic wants to get into
data centers so everyone's sort of
looking at how they can expand
vertically can I own the data centers I
think you know Sam Alman has talked
about owning chips or owning a
semiconductor fab at some point like
maybe that'll be part of the story. Who
knows? There's one thing that I don't
I'm sort of curious. I'd love to have
your take on. There was at the end of
September, Meta announced a deal to buy
compute from Coreweave, one of these neo
clouds.
>> I don't totally get that because Meta
has its own data centers, etc. Do you
have some intuitive sense about what an
established hyperscaler needs a neocloud
for in this arrangement? What core can
supply that Meta can't provide, build on
its own or buy on its own? nothing.
[laughter]
So that's the answer. So here's what's
going on. This is what's going on is
that there's this form of hoarding going
on. So what's happening is is people
saying you have capacity. I can lock
that up. I'll lock that up. And because
I can't lock it up yet by building a
data center quickly enough, I'll lock it
up in the marketplace. So once you start
thinking of compute as a hoardable
commodity and what people are doing is
trying to hoard it, control it before
someone else can do it because until
they bring on their own excess capacity,
that's really what's going on in a lot
of these transactions. This is a way of
making sure that I may not need this but
you sure can't have it. And so there's a
there's an element of compute hoarding
going on across the map because of you
know this backlog in building data
centers that may or may not ever get
built. So that's the answer. The answer
isn't that they care at all about
whether or not they can run giant
workloads on any particular neocloud
provider. It's the idea of hoarding
capacity and making sure that no one
else can have it like trying to like the
Hunt brothers and the getting a corner
on the silver market.
>> You know, I want to go back to China
because it is true that the US and China
seem locked in this existential race for
AI supremacy, but they seem to be taking
very different approaches to it. And in
the US, it's all about spending as much
money as you can developing these, you
know, state-of-the-art, mostly closed
source models. Whereas in China, it
seems to be much more about rapid
adoption and creating open-source models
that just get out into the market much
faster and much more cheaply. And so I'm
curious like which of those approaches
do you think is going to win here?
>> Yeah. So that that's a really good
question. So
I think it's going to be something
closer to the Chinese approach but not
for the reasons they expect. So the
reason is because so what let's I I'll
reframe what the Chinese are doing
slightly. So I'll say that instead of it
just being a sort of an example of open
source. I don't think that's the right
the right way to think about it is
they're using this kind of distillation
approach increasingly where there's kind
of a you think about it like okay I'm a
sales manager. I don't want to train all
my sales people. I'm going to train this
dude and they're going to train all the
sales. That's distillation right? You
train the trainer. I train somebody who
trains something else and the something
else in this case are these smaller
models. So that approach of kind of
training the trainer really speeds up
the process of creating new models
because I distill them. I train them out
of out of other models that are really
computensive like anthropics or open AIS
or whomever else is right. The notion is
so is there are huge efficiency gains to
be had in training and ch the Chinese
are showing the huge efficiency gains to
be had. And one way to think about it is
that the transformer models that underly
large language models that are so
computationally intensive went from the
lab to the market faster than any
product in technology history. So
they're absolutely bloated and full of
crap. Right? So these things are wildly
inefficient. There's all kinds of other
ways to do the same sorts of things. one
of which is distillation. So what you're
really seeing is a kind of an accident
of history that we came down the US came
down this path that led directly out of
the the original transformer paper in
2017 and the Chinese have said yeah
we're not going to be able to do that
for a bunch of different reasons but we
don't have to do that because I can take
this approach of distillation which lets
us get you if you look at Kimmy this
sort of relatively recent open source
these things are actually really
effective and benchmark very well and
it's not surprising because they've been
trained by really good trainers which is
to say some of the other models that are
out there. But it's these are about
efficiency gains, which should then ask
the next question is whoa, wait a
minute. If there's all these efficiency
gains ahead from training and training
is 70% of the workload on data centers,
hang on a second, aren't we completely
misforing the likely future, the arc of
demand for compute? And the answer is
yes. And this is rather than looking at
it as an example of why China is doing
something better for worse. Another way
of looking at it is saying this just
refuted the approach that we're taking
to training altogether because it shows
how bloated and inefficient the approach
we're taking is and yet we're projecting
on that basis what future data center
needs are.
>> Part of the question it seems to me and
this is where it gets a little bit
philosophical is what do these AI
companies think they're building?
Because one theory is like, well, maybe
they're building business tools, right?
Maybe they're building business tools of
various sorts. And if they're building
business tools of various sorts, that
implies the possibility that eventually
they get good enough. This does the job,
right? This makes it easier for this
website. You can uh, you know, use an
agent to book your travel and the
technology works and we don't have to
keep building it because we got to the
point where it works. And then there is
this other question of like well maybe
they want to build something called AGI
or ASI that's like so sci-fi etc. In
which case you could never get enough or
simply having built the thing that
allows you to book your travel or book a
dinner reservation or translate a text
or whatever that's not nearly enough.
You hear different things but what do
you think the builders at the cutting
edge of these labs are going for? Is it
really the sort of sci-fi building god
cliche or do they want to build
profitable business tools?
>> So, it's the first thing until you
challenge them and then it's the second.
So, what happens is if you have the
conversation internally, they'll say,
"Yeah, no, no, no. We're building just
really effective productivity enhancing
tools that'll be used across a host of
businesses and these all sounds really
good." But then when you walk through
some of the math in terms of justifying
the ROI on the spend, all of a sudden
then it turns into what I call
faith-based argumentation about AGI.
Yeah.
>> And they say it's like the the greatest
call option ever. Like what would you
pay for a call option that could get you
anything? And it's like, well, wait a
minute. This isn't a way of justifying
any particular expenditure. This is just
faith-based argumentation where you're
saying, you know, with the Uber call
option for anything, you should be
willing to pay anything for it. And
obviously that that kind of
justification doesn't get you anywhere.
So in in house they'll armwave a lot
about these different models that will
emerge. Who knows? I had someone at
Nvidia tell me the other day that we
really are just waiting for the Uber of
AI to come along and show us the future.
And I'm like okay. So that's but it's
not an answer, right? So
>> because in theory if you're building a
business productivity tool then
eventually you could solve your unit
economics problem, right? If you're just
trying to build a really great business
opportunity, then it's simply you know
what, we don't have to build anymore. It
works and then the cash flow just starts
pouring in and the cost per token goes
down.
>> You can and there's a bunch of that
already happening. It's really
interesting. But what's increasingly
happening is the problems they're
solving are really mundane. And so it's
things like I'm trying to onboard a
bunch of new suppliers. Right now the
people have weird zip codes and they
sometimes don't match up. I have a dude
in the back who fixes that. I'd rather
have someone who could do it faster so I
could onboard a lot more suppliers. Oh,
it turns out these small language models
are really good at that. These micro
models like IBM's Granite and whatever
else, but those things require a
fraction of the training, are very
cheap, are not going to justify anywhere
near the economics needed to pay for the
current spend. And yet those things are
almost like very very likely the future
because it'll be proflegate token use
from micro models often hosted
internally to do really mundane
background tasks. Not very glamorous
onboarding new suppliers, matching
records.
>> Yeah,
>> great stuff. Just not really very
exciting, but large language models are
amazing at it and small language models
are amazing at it and almost free
>> and writing songs, right, Joe? They can
do that. [laughter] I'm actually I'm
still annoyed that AI is like getting
into art and music writing and all the
fun stuff versus the stuff that I don't
want to do like folding laundry to your
classic example
>> or matching customer records
>> or that. So going back to the beginning
of this conversation when we were just
talking about the scale of AI investment
and its impact on the US economy, I'm
pretty sure you are one of the ones
who's described AI capex as like a
private sector stimulus program for the
US economy. What are the actual
consequences either positive or negative
of having this massive private sector
spend in the economy versus something I
guess more typical which would be a
government stimulus or maybe growth
driven by consumer spending or something
like that.
>> Yeah. So to an orthodox economist the
old line is like it really doesn't
matter what we pay people to do as long
as we pay them. Right. is the idea of I
should be I should be you should be
willing to pay people to dig holes in
the ground and people over there to fill
the holes back in again. It really
doesn't matter as long as the money is
out there and in circulation, right?
That's just it's all just stimulus,
right? So to that way of thinking, it
doesn't matter because the money is all
finding its way back into the economy.
But I think that's obviously hugely
misleading because in this context,
these are investments created with an
expectation of a return. If they can't
then that flows backwards into all the
entities that are built on that basis
whether it's private credit firms and
their returns the S&P 500 what is it
like 35% now is AR related mag 7 mag 10
whatever 40% 50% now the last two years
return so this is a massive negative
wealth effect when you unwind it not
just in terms of the direct spending but
in terms of the wealth effect with
respect to what people's holdings are so
this is not as simple as saying this has
just been a wonderful stimulus program
we're paying people to dig holes and
filling them back in again this is a
wasting asset on something that's likely
to be produced in quantities that we can
never earn an economic return from in
part because of wildly flawed
assumptions uh and projections about the
future of demand for those units. And so
that's that's the deep structural
problem. And then you can get into this
whole question of like, well, if it's
just private equity guys get hurt, you
know, who cares? Screw those guys,
right? And it's not, of course, because
as we just talked about, it's it's in
it's in equity funds.
>> It's firefighters and teachers money.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And it's in REITs now. Look
at the the larger holdings in reads now
increasingly our data centers and it's
even in sort of sneaky backdoor ways
like we're seeing increasing I don't
know if you guys are familiar with these
new interval funds they're appearing
there it's all over now
>> Paul Kadski we could I have a million
more questions I could ask you but much
like the race towards AGI itself that
would imply that we'll ever actually get
to the end of this conversation
[laughter]
so how about we uh wrap here and then
just plan on you know revisiting the com
six months maybe three years we just
keep revisiting down the line where we
are uh in the cycle.
>> As long as we haven't been turned into
paper clips, I'm good. I [laughter]
Yeah, that's the No one talks about the
>> nightmare clippy. I feel like uh that
was No one talks about the old school
paperclip maximizer stuff. Everyone's on
to more esoteric fears.
>> I know people have moved on. We need to
worry about
>> Did anyone wait, did anyone ever try to
securitize Clippy? They didn't, right?
>> I don't think so. No, they never did.
>> Thanks, Paul. Okay. Thanks, guys.
>> [music]
>> Paul's so good. That was a lot of fun.
>> He's so good. Here is my highest form of
praise for an OddLotss guest. I am going
to go back and read that transcript from
beginning to end.
>> That is a very good um That is a very
good practice to do. Wait, you're not
going to listen to it? You're only going
to read it?
>> No, I'm going to read it.
>> Yeah, I can't read it. I can't listen to
it.
>> I I just listen to it. I need to read
it. I can't listen to our episodes. No,
I just um you know, I think there's a
lot there's a lot more to do on all this
topic, but the financing in particular
and some of these arrangements, it's
just incredible how the speed with which
I guess I would say the financing has
gotten interesting. Do you know what I'm
saying? Like I think like a data center
project 10 years ago, a Microsoft AWS
thing just seemed like a fairly
straightforward. It's probably more
complicated than I appreciate at the
time, but basically straightforward. we
make this money and part of it is going
to go to building more data centers to
you know serve you know Amazon Prime
streaming or whatever it is or some
client thing or whatever and then the
degree of complexity with these SPVS and
rollover risk and depreciation schedules
and trunching of who it it's gotten very
interesting very fast
>> life uh finds a way life finds a way
yeah
>> that was my terrible terrible impression
I think that's absolutely right one
thing I would say is the fact that a lot
of these big supposedly cashrich
companies are doing this through SPVS
that effectively preserve their balance
sheet and their cash flow so they can do
something else with it. I mean
>> a lot of companies use SPVS. Sure.
>> Yeah.
>> But I do think it says something about
the scale. Yes. Right. Like there's a
scale problem here where if all your
spending was appearing on balance sheet,
investors might think very very
differently about your company. And then
the other thing I would say is I still
think the compare and contrast between
the US and China and their approaches to
AI both you know both of them I think
would agree that this is an existential
problem of some sort or an existential
competition but they're following very
different paths
>> and it does seem to me like the arc of
history kind of leans towards stuff
becoming cheaper.
>> I think the arc the arc of history bends
towards China is what I thought.
>> Well that too that too. Um but it bends
towards you know people generally want
the cheaper thing and they want the
thing that's like available now and I
China seems to be going for that.
>> The counterargument is that if you're
going to use an open-source model for
some purposes you have to supply your
own electricity right you have to supply
your own inference you got to host on
your service like you still run into
some constraints and so rather than
having it be on whatever whoever else's
data center you got to find a way to run
it yourself.
>> Yeah. Okay. But China has a leg up in
electricity.
>> They have a lot which was the point that
Jensen Wong made. I mean part of the
reason like there's so much talk about
this these days right now is that the
industry insiders are saying a bunch of
weird things. Paul mentioned the Sarah
Frier comment. Oh yeah. And she which
she sort of had to walk back but then
she said the
>> that Sam Alman
>> then there was the Sam Alman thing where
he was asked how are you going to pay
for all this and he said look you want
to sell your shares or not which is like
the interviewer probably thought he was
>> a little defensive. Obviously, Jensen
Wong talking at recently about how China
was going to win. Maybe he was saying
that because he wanted to catalyze more
action on solving some of the
electricity problems in the US. But, you
know, the very people at the center of
this are saying things right now that
you know what's interesting too is um
you know this bullwhip phenomenon.
Everyone, as Paul described it, he
didn't use the word bullwhip, but when
everyone is trying to get their hands on
the same gear, you got to wonder how
sustain what's the other side of a
bullwhip could look like. I don't know.
We just got to do more episodes on this.
>> Yeah, we have to. Shall we leave it
there for now?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> All right. This has been another episode
of the All Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Check out Paul
Kadroski's writing at paulcadrski.com.
Follow our producers, Carmen Rodriguez
at Carmen, Dashelob Bennett at Dashbot,
and Kaleb Brooks at Kaleb Brooks. And
for more oddlots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
[music] discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk about the AI, private
[music] credit, leverage, subprime,
economy, nexus, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. [music] And remember, if you
are a Bloomberg subscriber, you can
listen to all of our episodes absolutely
adree. All you have to do is [music]
find the Bloomberg channel on Apple
Podcast and follow the instructions
there. Thanks for listening.
[music]
>> [music]